A conservation community (or conservation development) is a real estate and conservation hybrid model of land development, consisting of both protected areas and human settlements, with the primary goal of saving large parcels of land from ecological degradation. This land can be forested land, agricultural land, ranch land, or any other type of land that needs protecting from high-impact development. This model is contrasted from other protected area models by integrating human communities within nature, rather than relocating them outside, and as such falls under the IUCN's Category V protected area designation. 
The model represents an integral balance between people and nature and can sustain for-profit activity such as residential communities, private clubs, or small-scale industrial activity on conditions that ensure the continued protection or ecological restoration of an area.


== Overview ==

Conservation communities are models of sustainable community development, providing an alternative to conventional forms of development. They are adaptable to the needs of different regions and they use small-scale residential development to fund conservation, eliminating the need to solely depend on funding from private donors or governments, though they are sometimes additionally subsidized by such investments. This land development model is important to the Environmental movement's goals of sustainable development, Green homebuilding, local food security, and responsible management of natural resources.
Some of the tools used to create conservation communities are conservation covenants, ecoforestry covenants, and other forms of covenant registered to the title of the land. Covenants are a legal contract used to protect the integrity of ecosystem, the ecological health of watersheds (which are damaged by increased development), maintain long-term access to natural resources and associated value-added opportunities, protect native plant and animal species, and prevent climate change impacts.
In an effort to avoid greenwashing and in order to increase accountability and public transparency, some conservation communities establish separate 501(c)(3) non-profit land trusts, which own the land in fee and extend conservation easements to developers and private homeowners. This way, the incentive structure ensures real estate developers stay true to the mission of conservation, with the land trust vested with authority to investigate, report, and penalize infractions.
Conservation communities are developed not only to minimize their ecological footprint, but also to improve (or at least does not diminish) the existing ecological system's performance. The planning stage for the residential community focuses around maintaining and enhancing the ecological integrity of the land. The community, therefore, sits on the least sensitive part of the land from an ecological point of view, and is often built using low-impact infrastructure such as LEED-targeted housing. To further reduce broader environmental impact, many conservation communities (whether in whole or in part) generate their own power, pump their own water, and grow food on-site.


== The economy ==
In addition to residential use, conservation communities can supplement their funding through other eco-compatible uses such as sustainable resource extraction, value-added manufacturing opportunities, organic horticulture, live/work enterprises, ecotourism, recreational and ecological educational opportunities. Through these additional measures, long-term protection of the land is sustained by the economic value created through restrained, eco-conscious business.
Additionally, conservation communities can create sustainable employment opportunities for those living in the communities as well as the surrounding region. Ecotourism promotes environmental protection and support for the well-being of local community members by bringing visitors into the conservation community for educational and recreational purposes.


== Community ==
As a novel and intentional approach to human settlement, conservation communities can be designed to strengthen interconnectedness between community members as well as with the broader local community. Doug Makaroff, founder of Elkington Forest noted that “by building sustainable and relational communities, our lives are richer.”


== Examples ==


== See also ==

Community-based conservation
Conservation development
Land trust
Private protected area
Protected area


== References ==


== Sources ==
McMahon, Edward (2010). Conservation communities : creating value with nature, open space, and agriculture. Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute. ISBN 9780874202175.
Anderson, Jennifer (Summer 2014). "Protecting Land Through Conservation Development: Lessons from Land Trust Experience". Saving Land Magazine. Land Trust Alliance. Retrieved 7 March 2022.
Heid, FASLA, Jim (June 2014). "Conservation Development" (PDF). JHeid.com/ideas. Retrieved 7 March 2022. A definitional framework of Conservation Development and four case studies.