The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) is a British research council that supports research, training and knowledge transfer activities in the environmental sciences.


== History ==
NERC began in 1965 when several environmental (mainly geographic) research organisations (including Nature Conservancy which became the Nature Conservancy Council in 1973 and was divided up in 1991) were brought under the one umbrella organisation. When most research councils were re-organised in 1994, it had new responsibilities – Earth observation and science-developed archaeology. Collaboration between research councils increased in 2002 when Research Councils UK was formed.


=== Chief executives ===
Sir Graham Sutton (1965–1970)• Professor James William Longman Beament (succeeding V. C. Wynne-Edwards FRS) 1978-1981

Professor John Krebs, Baron Krebs 1994-1999
Sir John Lawton 1999–2005
Professor Alan Thorpe 2005–2011
Dr Steven Wilson (Acting) – 2011–2012
Professor Duncan Wingham – from 1 January 2012 (BIS announcement)


== Organisational structure ==
The council's head office is at Polaris House in Swindon, alongside the other six Research Councils. NERC's research centres provide leadership to the UK environmental science community and play significant and influential roles in international science collaborations.

It also supports a number of collaborative centres of excellence and subject-based designated Environmental Data Centres for the storage and distribution of environmental data.


== Mission ==
The Natural Environment Research Council delivers independent research, survey, training and knowledge transfer in the environmental sciences, to advance knowledge of planet Earth as a complex, interacting system. The council's work covers the full range of atmospheric, Earth, biological, terrestrial and aquatic sciences, from the deep oceans to the upper atmosphere, and from the geographical poles to the equator.
NERC's mission is to gather and apply knowledge, create understanding and predict the behaviour of the natural environment and its resources, and communicate all aspects of the council's work. The British Meteorological Office is not part of NERC.


== NERC Airborne Research Facility ==

The NERC Airborne Research Facility (ARF) collects and processes remotely sensed data for use by the scientific community. Data are collected from one of four Twin Otter research aircraft (or a Dash 7) operated by British Antarctic Survey, processed by a data analysis team at the Plymouth Marine Laboratory and archived at the National Earth Observation Data Centre (NEODC). Currently the NERC ARF provides radiometrically corrected hyperspectral data from the AISA Fenix and Owl instruments; ground height information from the Leica ALS50-II; and digital photography.


== See also ==

Conservation biology
Conservation ethic
Conservation movement
David Carson (climatologist)
Ecology
Ecology movement
Environmentalism
Environmental movement
Environmental protection
Habitat conservation
List of environmental organisations
Natural environment
Natural capital
Natural resource
Renewable resource
Royal Research Ship
Sustainable development
Sustainability


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (CEH)
National Centre for Atmospheric Science (NCAS)
National Centre for Earth Observation (NCEO)
ARSF-DAN Wiki