Population density (in agriculture: standing stock or plant density) is a measurement of population per unit area, or exceptionally unit volume; it is a quantity of type number density. It is frequently applied to living organisms, most of the time to humans. It is a key geographical term. In simple terms, population density refers to the number of people living in an area per square kilometre.


== Biological population densities ==
Population density  is population divided by total land area or water volume, as appropriate.Low densities may cause an extinction vortex and lead to further reduced fertility. This is called the Allee effect after the scientist who identified it. Examples of the causes of reduced fertility in low population densities are 
Increased problems with locating sexual mates
Increased inbreeding


=== Human densities ===

Population density is the number of people per unit of area, usually quoted per square kilometer or square mile, and which may include or exclude for example areas of water or glaciers. Commonly this may be calculated for a county, city, country, another territory or the entire world.
The world's population is around 7,800,000,000 and Earth's total area (including land and water) is 510,000,000 km2 (197,000,000 sq. mi.). Therefore, from this very crude type of calculation, the worldwide human population density is approximately 7,800,000,000 ÷ 510,000,000 = 15.3 per km2 (40 per sq. mi.). However, if only the Earth's land area of 150,000,000 km2 (58,000,000 sq. mi.) is taken into account, then human population density is 50 per km2 (129 per sq. mi.). This includes all continental and island land area, including Antarctica. Furthermore, if Antarctica is also excluded, then population density rises to over 55 people per km2 (over 142 per sq. mi.).However, much of the Earth's land mass consists of areas inhospitable to human habitation, such as deserts and high mountains, and the population tends to cluster around seaports and fresh-water sources. Therefore, additional criteria are needed to make simple population density values meaningful and useful.
Several of the most densely populated territories in the world are city-states, microstates and urban dependencies. In fact, 95% of the world's population is concentrated on just 10% of the world's land. These territories have a relatively small area and a high urbanization  level, with an economically specialized city population drawing also on rural resources outside the area, illustrating the difference between high population density and overpopulation.
Deserts have very limited potential for growing crops as there is not enough rain to support them. Thus, their population density is generally low. However, some cities in the Middle East, such as Dubai, have been increasing in population and infrastructure growth at a fast pace.Cities with high population densities are, by some, considered to be overpopulated, though this will depend on factors like quality of housing and infrastructure and access to resources. Very densely populated cities are mostly in Asia (particularly Southeast Asia); Africa's Lagos, Kinshasa, and Cairo; South America's Bogotá, Lima, and São Paulo; and Mexico City and Saint Petersburg also fall into this category.City population and especially area are, however, heavily dependent on the definition of "urban area" used: densities are almost invariably higher for the center only than when suburban settlements and intervening rural areas are included, as in the agglomeration or metropolitan area (the latter sometimes including neighboring cities).
In comparison, based on a world population of 7.8 billion, the world's inhabitants, if conceptualized as a loose crowd occupying just under 1 m2 (10 sq. ft) per person (cf. Jacobs Method), would occupy a space a little larger than Delaware's land area.


=== Countries and dependent territories ===


=== Other methods of measurement ===
Although the arithmetic density is the most common way of measuring population density, several other methods have been developed to provide a more accurate measure of population density over a specific area.

Arithmetic density: The total number of people / area of land
Physiological density: The total population / area of arable land
Agricultural density: The total rural population / area of arable land
Residential density: The number of people living in an urban area / area of residential land
Urban density: The number of people inhabiting an urban area / total area of urban land
Ecological optimum: The density of population that can be supported by the natural resources
Living density: Population density at which the average person lives


== See also ==
Distance sampling
Demography
Human geography
Idealised population
List of population concern organizations
Optimum population
Plant density
Population dynamics
Population decline
Population growth
Population genetics
Population health
Population momentum
Population pyramid
Rural transport problem
Small population size


=== Lists of entities by population density ===
List of Australian suburbs by population density
List of countries by population density
List of cities by population density
List of city districts by population density
List of English districts by population density
List of European Union cities proper by population density
List of islands by population density
List of states and territories of the United States by population density


== References ==


== External links ==
Selected Current and Historic City, Ward & Neighborhood Density
Duncan Smith / UCL Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis. "World Population Density". exploratory map shows data from the [...] Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL) produced by the European Commission JRC and the CIESIN Columbia University